
GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOLDING SANDS

. Green strength. The green sand, after water
has been mixed into it, must have adequate
strength and plasticity for making and handling
of the mold.

. Dry strength. Asa casting is poured, sand
adjacent to the hot metal quickly loses its water
as steam. The dry sand must have strength to
resist erosion, and also the metallostatic
pressure of the molten metal, or else the mold
may enlarge.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOLDING SANDS

. Hot strength. After the moisture has evaporated,
the sand may be required to possess strength at
some elevated temperature, above 100 °C.
Metallostatic pressure of the liquid-metal bearing
against the mold walls may cause mold
enlargement, or if the metal is still flowing, erosion,
cracks, or breakage may occur unless the sand
possesses adequate hot strength.

. Permeability. Heat from the casting causes a
green-sand mold to evolve a great deal of steam
and other gases. The mold must be permeable, i.e.
porous, to permit the gases to pass off, or the
casting will contain gas holes.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOLDING SANDS

5. Thermal stability. Heat from the casting causes
rapid expansion of the sand surface at the mold-
metal interface. The mold surface may then
crack, buckle, or flake off (scab) unless the molding
sand is relatively stable dimensionally under rapid
heating.

6. Refractoriness. Higher pouring temperatures,
such as those for ferrous alloys at 2400 to 3200 F,
require greater refractoriness of the sand. Low-
pouring-temperature metals, for example,
aluminum, poured at 1300 F, do not require a high
degree of refractoriness from the sand.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MOLDING SANDS

7. Flowability. The sand should respond to molding
processes.

8. Produces good casting finish.

9. Collapsibility. Heated sand which becomes hard and
rocklike is difficult to remove from the casting and may
cause the contracting metal to tear or crack.

10. Is reusable.

11. Offers ease of sand preparation and control.

12. Removes heat from the cooling casting.

This list by no means includes all the properties which
might be desirable. Obviously, the most important
characteristic of a molding sand is that it facilitate the
economic production of good castings.
